# libimportx

Call functions written in other languages as if they were the same
language. **This repository documents the API. For implementations of the
library, see the specific language implementations in
[implementations](#Implementations).**


## Identifiers

Use dot notation for dictionaries/attributes and bracket notation for lists or
when the name is not a valid identifier. Examples:
- `dict.mykey` is the variable `mykey` in `dict`.
- `dict["my key"]` is the variable `my key` in `dict`.
- `list[0]` is the first element in `list`.

## Special JSON Notation

Use these to represent non-JSON types (these contain newlines for readability
only). The "handle" property should be a unique handle if the object is being
returned from a function, otherwise it should just be the identifier. The
`__libimportx_foreign_type__` property should be either `opaque` for types that
cannot be moved across languages but can have their methods called and
attributes accessed like file handles or `function` for functions. If it is not
`function`, it should have a `type` property that is the name of the object type
(whatever that language's type function returns, does not need to be
consistent). Note that opaque objects can also be callable like functions. Both
functions and opaque objects should be represented as `ImportxOpaque` objects.
Examples:

- A function in the root namespace:
```json
{
    "__libimportx_foreign_type__": "function",
    "handle": "addNumbers"
}
```

- An element of an n-dimensional NumPy array (myarray is an array of arrays, and
    this is the second array):
```json
{
    "__libimportx_foreign_type__": "opaque",
    "type": "numpy.ndarray",
    "handle": "myarray[1]"
}
```

- A function that in another namespace:
```json
{
    "__libimportx_foreign_type__": "function",
    "handle": "requests.get"
}
```
- A function returned from a function (this is not statically defined):
```json
{
    "__libimportx_foreign_type__": "function",
    "handle": "function 1a2b3c"
}
```
- An opaque object returned from a function:
```json
{
    "__libimportx_foreign_type__": "opaque",
    "type": "numpy.float64",
    "handle": "opaque 1a2b3c"
}
```
Handles(when not just the identifiers) should be generated by using an
incrementing hexadecimal counter and prefixing it with the type as shown. The
handles and corresponding data should be stored in a dictionary so they can be
accessed by using them in the identifier field. The space character is important
to prevent collisions with actual identifiers. It is also acceptable to generate
a unique handle even when an identifier is available, but both the identifier
and the handle should work to access the object. 

## Error Notation

When returning a response, prefix it with `+` if successful or `-` if there was
an error. For errors, the JSON should have the `type` and `message` keys.

# API

libimportx-compatible libraries must implement the following:

## `exportx()` function

This function is used to allow other languages to use `importx` on the file.
This should be called after defining all the functions.

### Inputs

No parameters.

### Action

First, check the `LIBIMPORTX` environment variable. If it is not `true`, return
False (the library is not being importx'ed). Read the `LIBIMPORTX_HOST` (this
will be a filepath to a unix socket) and `LIBIMPORTX_TOKEN` environment
variables. Then, create a connection to the socket and send the token then a
newline character and wait for a response with a timeout. The response should be
`+\n`. If it isn't, throw an error (token incorrect, should not happen). If it
is correct, enter a blocking loop where you wait to receieve a response with no
timeout. If the response is an empty string (connection closed), exit the
program.  Otherwise, parse the response as JSON (keep reading until newline) and
check the `type` field. It can be one of:
- `read`: The `identifier` field will be the name of the variable or function to
    read. Parse the variable/function as JSON and send it, prefixed with `+` if
    successful or `-` if there was an error.

- `set`: Set the variable with the name in the `identifier` field to the value
    in the `value` field. Send back `+` if successful or prefix with `-` if
    there was an error.
- `call`: Call the function with the name in the `identifier` field with the
    arguments in the `args` and `kwargs` fields, and send back the return value
    as JSON. Prefix the JSON with `+` if it was successful, or `-` if there was
    an error.

For errors, the JSON should have the keys `type` and `message`. The error should
be caught and not crash the program. Use the [Special JSON
Notation](#Special-JSON-Notation) to represent non-JSON objects. It is required
to make sure the sent JSON is in one line and add a newline at the end.

### `importx(filepath)`

This function is used to import a file.

### Inputs

- `filepath`: The path to the file to import.
- `cmd`: (optional) The command to run the file.

Example: `importx("myfile.py")` or `importx("myfile.py", "python3 myfile.py")`.

### Action

Create a unix socket somewhere and generate a random token. Then, run the file
in a subprocess with the following environment variables set:
- `LIBIMPORTX=true`
- `LIBIMPORTX_HOST=<path to the socket>`
- `LIBIMPORTX_TOKEN=<the generated token>`

To run the file, try these steps in order:
- Check for the `cmd` parameter. If it exists, run that command.  Read from the
  file until `\n` or `\r\n`.\
    If it starts with `#!` or `//!`, use the rest of the line as the command.
- If it starts with `##!` or `///!`, read the rest of the line. Then, replace
    `$IN` with the filepath. If it contains `$OUT`, replace it as well with a
    temporary file path, then run the command and run the file. If it doesn't,
    run the replaced command. The `$OUT` file must be created in a safe
    temporary directory (`/tmp` or `%TEMP%`) and cleaned up after the program
    exits.
- If the environment variable `LIBIMPORTX_DEFAULT_CMD_<EXTENSION>` exists (where
    `<EXTENSION>` is the file extension in uppercase), run that command with the
    same replacements as above for `$IN` and `$OUT`.
- Look up the file extension in the following table and run the corresponding
    command:
| Extension | Command |
| --------- | ------- |
|`.py`|`python3 $IN`|
|`.js`|`node $IN`|
|`.rb`|`ruby $IN`|
|`.lua`|`lua $IN`|
|`.java`|`java $IN`|
|`.c`|`gcc $IN -o $OUT`|
|`.cpp`|`g++ $IN -o $OUT`|
|`.rs`|`rustc $IN -o $OUT`|
|`.go`|`go run $IN`|
|`.sh`|`bash $IN`|
|`.ps1`|`pwsh -File $IN`|
|`.php`|`php $IN`|
|`.pl`|`perl $IN`|
|`.r`|`Rscript $IN`|

- Try running it as a binary.
- If nothing works, throw an error.

If the user does not have the correct interpreter installed, throw a descriptive
error message telling the user to install the interpreter and set the
environment variable if necessary.

Once the process connects to the socket and sends the token, check that it is
correct and then send back `+\n`. Then, return an `ImportxModule` object linked
to the socket to access the functions and variables in the file. If the token is
incorrect, send back `-\n`, close the socket then throw an import error.

## `ImportxModule` object

This is returned by `importx()` and is used to access the functions and
variables in the file.

### Initialization

When initialized, it should take in a unix socket, the subprocess and the
temporary `$OUT` file if generated and store it in a variable. It should close
the socket and remove the temporary files when the object is destroyed.

### getattr and getitem methods

When an attribute is accessed, send a `read` request to the socket. If the
response is a function, return a function that sends a `call` request to the
socket with the arguments and keyword arguments. If it is a dictionary, return
an `ImportxNamespace` object with the dictionary as its data. In both
dictionaries and lists, replace all special JSON objects with an `ImportxOpaque`
object that stores the handle and type. If there is an error (either in reading
or when calling the function), throw an error with the message from the
response. `getattr` and `getitem` should have the same behavior.

### setattr and setitem methods

When an attribute is set, send a `set` request to the socket. If there is an
error, throw it.


## `ImportxOpaque` object

This is used to represent opaque objects or functions that cannot be moved
between multiple languages but can have their methods called and attributes
accessed. It should store the handle and the type of the object. The type is
optional (when no type, store as None since it is a function).

### Initialization

It should take in the handle, type and the unix socket and store them in
variables.

### getattr, getitem, setattr and setitem methods

Similar to the `ImportxModule` object, but when sending the `read` or `set`
request, but the variables accessed are inside the handle and the identifier
should be modified accordingly. Examples: `opaque e2a3b.mykey` or
`myfile["not a valid identifier."]`.

### call method

When the object is called, send a `call` request to the socket with the handle
as the identifier and the arguments. Throw any errors that occur. The return
value (JSON) should be converted back into the appropriate object similar to
`getattr`.


## `ImportxNamespace` object

This is a simple object similar to a dictionary whose keys can be accessed with
either `.name` or `["name"]` for consistency (you do not want to need to do
`module["function"]()`).

# Implementations
- Python: libimportx-python
    [GitHub](https://github.com/itzmetanjim/libimportx-python)
    [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/libimportx/1.0.1/)
